tutorial/chapter-02-environment-setup.md, before:

# Chapter 2: Environment Setup

This chapter covers everything you need to install and configure before writing any application code. By the end, you will have a working Python environment with all dependencies, a local LLM inference server, and the Anki ecosystem ready to receive flashcards programmatically.

## Project Structure

Create a project directory and the following file layout:

```
anki/
├── main.py
├── config.py
├── requirements.txt
├── audio/
└── modules/
    ├── __init__.py
    ├── retriever.py
    ├── llm.py
    ├── tts.py
    ├── flashcard.py
    └── anki_connect.py
```

The `audio/` directory stores generated `.mp3` files. The `modules/` directory contains one Python file per pipeline stage. `config.py` holds all configuration constants. `main.py` is the CLI entry point that orchestrates everything.

```bash
mkdir anki
cd anki
mkdir modules audio
touch main.py config.py requirements.txt
touch modules/__init__.py modules/retriever.py modules/llm.py
touch modules/tts.py modules/flashcard.py modules/anki_connect.py
```

## Python

### Version Requirements

The project requires **Python 3.8 or later**. The minimum version is set by `asyncio.run()`, which was introduced in Python 3.8 and is used by the TTS module. The code has been tested on Python 3.8 and 3.13.

Check your installed version:

```bash
python --version
```

On Windows, `python` may resolve to a Windows Store stub rather than an actual interpreter. If you get a "Python was not found" error or are redirected to the Microsoft Store, use `python3` or `py` instead:

```bash
python3 --version
py --version
```

If you need to install Python, download it from [python.org](https://www.python.org/downloads/) or install it from the Microsoft Store on Windows. Either method works — the Microsoft Store version installs to a user-local path and does not require administrator privileges.

### Virtual Environments

For a single-user local tool like this, a virtual environment is optional but not harmful. If you prefer to isolate dependencies:

```bash
python -m venv venv

# Linux/macOS
source venv/bin/activate

# Windows (PowerShell)
.\venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1

# Windows (cmd)
.\venv\Scripts\activate.bat
```

If you skip the virtual environment, `pip install` will install packages to your user site-packages directory. This is fine for a project with only four dependencies that are unlikely to conflict with anything else on your system.

### A Note on Containerization

A project like this is a poor candidate for containerization. The pipeline depends on two localhost services — LM Studio and Anki — that run as desktop GUI applications on the host machine. Putting the Python code inside a Docker container would require exposing those host ports into the container, mounting volumes for audio files, and dealing with cross-platform path differences. The complexity would exceed the benefit.

The reproducibility problem that containers solve is better addressed here by pinning dependency versions in `requirements.txt` if needed. The project has four direct dependencies and all of them are stable, well-maintained packages.

## Dependencies

### requirements.txt

```
jamdict
jamdict-data
edge-tts
requests
```

These are the four direct dependencies:

| Package | Purpose | Installs |
|---------|---------|----------|
| `jamdict` | Python interface to JMdict and KANJIDIC2 Japanese dictionaries | Query API + SQLite database driver |
| `jamdict-data` | Pre-packaged dictionary database (~54 MB compressed) | SQLite database file containing JMdict + KANJIDIC2 |
| `edge-tts` | Text-to-speech via Microsoft Edge's TTS service | Async TTS client with voice selection |
| `requests` | HTTP client | Used for LM Studio and AnkiConnect API calls |

### Installation

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### The `jamdict-data` Problem on Windows

`jamdict-data` has a known installation issue on Windows. The package bundles a compressed SQLite database (`jamdict.db.xz`) that gets decompressed during installation. On Windows, the build process sometimes fails with `WinError 32` ("The process cannot access the file because it is being used by another process") because the installer tries to delete the `.xz` file while it is still memory-mapped.

If the install fails, try these steps in order:

**1. Install `wheel` first, then retry:**

```bash
pip install wheel
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

The `wheel` package provides an alternative build path that sometimes avoids the file lock.

**2. If it still fails, install `jamdict-data` separately with `setup.py`:**

```bash
pip install jamdict edge-tts requests
pip download jamdict-data --no-binary :all: -d /tmp/jd
cd /tmp/jd
tar xzf jamdict_data-1.5.tar.gz
cd jamdict_data-1.5
python setup.py install --user
```

**3. If the database file is installed but not decompressed, decompress it manually:**

```python
import lzma, shutil, jamdict_data, os

xz_path = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(jamdict_data.__file__), "jamdict.db.xz")
db_path = xz_path.replace(".xz", "")

with lzma.open(xz_path, "rb") as f_in, open(db_path, "wb") as f_out:
    shutil.copyfileobj(f_in, f_out)
```

Run this as a one-off script or in a Python REPL. It reads the compressed database and writes the decompressed version alongside it.

### Verifying the Install

After installation, verify that all packages import correctly:

```bash
python -c "from jamdict import Jamdict; print('jamdict OK')"
python -c "import edge_tts; print('edge-tts OK')"
python -c "import requests; print('requests OK')"
```

The `jamdict` import will take a moment on first run as it locates the database file.

## LM Studio

LM Studio is a desktop application that runs large language models locally and exposes them through an OpenAI-compatible HTTP API. Our `llm.py` module sends requests to this API.

### Installation

Download LM Studio from [lmstudio.ai](https://lmstudio.ai). It is available for Windows, macOS, and Linux. Install it like any desktop application.

### Loading a Model

After launching LM Studio, you need to download and load a model. From the home screen:

1. Use the search bar to find a model. For Japanese language tasks, instruction-tuned models in the 7B–13B parameter range work well. Some options:
   - `Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct` — strong multilingual performance, good Japanese
   - `Mistral-7B-Instruct` — reliable general-purpose instruction following
   - `Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct` — solid baseline with good structured output

2. Select a **quantization level**. Quantization compresses the model to use less memory at the cost of some quality. Common levels:
   - `Q4_K_M` — good balance of quality and memory usage (~4–5 GB for a 7B model)
   - `Q5_K_M` — slightly better quality, slightly more memory
   - `Q8_0` — near-original quality, ~2x the memory of Q4

   If your GPU has 8 GB of VRAM, a 7B model at Q4_K_M will fit comfortably. If you have 16 GB or more, you can run larger models or higher quantization levels.

3. Click **Download** and wait for the download to complete.

### Starting the Local Server

Once a model is loaded:

1. Navigate to the **Local Server** tab (in the left sidebar or top menu, depending on your LM Studio version).
2. Select the model you downloaded.
3. Click **Start Server**.

The server starts on `http://localhost:1234` by default. You can verify it is running:

```bash
curl http://localhost:1234/v1/models
```

Or with Python:

```python
import requests
r = requests.get("http://localhost:1234/v1/models")
print(r.json())
```

This should return a JSON response listing the loaded model. The exact model name does not matter for our purposes — the `config.py` file uses `"local-model"` as a placeholder, and LM Studio routes to whatever model is currently loaded regardless of the name in the request.

### Configuration

The relevant config values in `config.py`:

```python
LM_STUDIO_URL = "http://localhost:1234/v1/chat/completions"
LM_STUDIO_MODEL = "local-model"
```

`LM_STUDIO_URL` points to the chat completions endpoint, which follows the OpenAI API format. `LM_STUDIO_MODEL` is sent in the request body — LM Studio requires the field to be present but ignores its value, always routing to the loaded model.

If you changed the port in LM Studio's server settings, update `LM_STUDIO_URL` accordingly.

## Anki and AnkiConnect

### Installing Anki

Download Anki from [apps.ankiweb.net](https://apps.ankiweb.net). Install and launch it. If this is a fresh install, you will have a single default deck.

### Installing AnkiConnect

AnkiConnect is a third-party Anki add-on that exposes a JSON-over-HTTP API on `localhost:8765`. Our `anki_connect.py` module uses this API to create decks, store media files, and add notes.

To install:

1. In Anki, go to **Tools > Add-ons > Get Add-ons...**
2. Enter the add-on code: `2055492159`
3. Click **OK** and restart Anki.

After restarting, AnkiConnect runs silently in the background whenever Anki is open. Verify it is running:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8765 -X POST -d "{\"action\": \"version\", \"version\": 6}"
```

Or with Python:

```python
import requests
r = requests.post("http://localhost:8765", json={"action": "version", "version": 6})
print(r.json())  # {"result": 6, "error": null}
```

### Note Types and Deck Configuration

Our tool uses the `Basic` note type, which ships with every Anki installation. It has two fields: `Front` and `Back`. The flashcard module writes HTML into these fields, including `[sound:filename.mp3]` tags that Anki renders as audio players.

The deck name is set in `config.py`:

```python
ANKI_DECK_NAME = "Japanese"
ANKI_NOTE_TYPE = "Basic"
```

The tool creates the deck automatically if it does not exist (via AnkiConnect's `createDeck` action), so there is no manual deck setup required. If you want to use a different deck name or note type, change these values before running the tool.

### AnkiConnect Permissions

By default, AnkiConnect accepts requests from any origin on localhost. If you have modified AnkiConnect's configuration (Tools > Add-ons > AnkiConnect > Config), ensure that `webCorsOriginList` includes `*` or is not overly restrictive:

```json
{
    "apiKey": null,
    "apiLogPath": null,
    "webBindAddress": "127.0.0.1",
    "webBindPort": 8765,
    "webCorsOriginList": ["*"]
}
```

If you have set an `apiKey`, you will need to modify `anki_connect.py` to include it in requests. The default configuration (no API key) is assumed throughout this tutorial.

## config.py

With all services installed and verified, the full configuration file:

```python
LM_STUDIO_URL = "http://localhost:1234/v1/chat/completions"
LM_STUDIO_MODEL = "local-model"
ANKI_CONNECT_URL = "http://localhost:8765"
ANKI_DECK_NAME = "Japanese"
ANKI_NOTE_TYPE = "Basic"
AUDIO_DIR = "audio/"
```

Six constants, all pointing to local resources. Every module in the project imports this file to resolve endpoints and paths. There is no environment variable parsing, no `.env` file loading, and no runtime configuration. If you need to change a value, you edit this file and re-run the tool.

`AUDIO_DIR` is a relative path. Generated `.mp3` files are written here during the TTS stage, then read back during the AnkiConnect stage (to base64-encode and upload them to Anki's media folder). The directory is created automatically if it does not exist.

## Verification Checklist

Before proceeding to the implementation chapters, confirm that all components are operational:

| Component | How to Verify | Expected Result |
|-----------|---------------|-----------------|
| Python | `python --version` | 3.8 or later |
| jamdict | `python -c "from jamdict import Jamdict; Jamdict()"` | No errors |
| edge-tts | `python -c "import edge_tts"` | No errors |
| requests | `python -c "import requests"` | No errors |
| LM Studio | `curl http://localhost:1234/v1/models` | JSON with model list |
| Anki | Application is open and running | Visible in taskbar |
| AnkiConnect | `curl -X POST http://localhost:8765 -d '{"action":"version","version":6}'` | `{"result": 6, ...}` |

If any of these fail, revisit the corresponding section above. The implementation chapters assume all of these are working.

Commit message:

Fix: Inaccuracies and remove dead imports across code and tutorial

tutorial/chapter-02-environment-setup.md, after:

# Chapter 2: Environment Setup

This chapter covers everything you need to install and configure before writing any application code. By the end, you will have a working Python environment with all dependencies, a local LLM inference server, and the Anki ecosystem ready to receive flashcards programmatically.

## Project Structure

Create a project directory and the following file layout:

```
anki/
├── main.py
├── config.py
├── requirements.txt
├── audio/
└── modules/
    ├── __init__.py
    ├── retriever.py
    ├── llm.py
    ├── tts.py
    ├── flashcard.py
    └── anki_connect.py
```

The `audio/` directory stores generated `.mp3` files. The `modules/` directory contains one Python file per pipeline stage. `config.py` holds all configuration constants. `main.py` is the CLI entry point that orchestrates everything.

```bash
mkdir anki
cd anki
mkdir modules audio
touch main.py config.py requirements.txt
touch modules/__init__.py modules/retriever.py modules/llm.py
touch modules/tts.py modules/flashcard.py modules/anki_connect.py
```

## Python

### Version Requirements

The project requires **Python 3.8 or later**. The minimum version is set by `asyncio.run()`, which was introduced in Python 3.7, but 3.8 is the minimum we support due to improvements in asyncio's event loop handling. The TTS module uses `asyncio.run()` to bridge async and sync code. The code has been tested on Python 3.8 and 3.13.

Check your installed version:

```bash
python --version
```

On Windows, `python` may resolve to a Windows Store stub rather than an actual interpreter. If you get a "Python was not found" error or are redirected to the Microsoft Store, use `python3` or `py` instead:

```bash
python3 --version
py --version
```

If you need to install Python, download it from [python.org](https://www.python.org/downloads/) or install it from the Microsoft Store on Windows. Either method works — the Microsoft Store version installs to a user-local path and does not require administrator privileges.

### Virtual Environments

For a single-user local tool like this, a virtual environment is optional but not harmful. If you prefer to isolate dependencies:

```bash
python -m venv venv

# Linux/macOS
source venv/bin/activate

# Windows (PowerShell)
.\venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1

# Windows (cmd)
.\venv\Scripts\activate.bat
```

If you skip the virtual environment, `pip install` will install packages to your user site-packages directory. This is fine for a project with only four dependencies that are unlikely to conflict with anything else on your system.

### A Note on Containerization

A project like this is a poor candidate for containerization. The pipeline depends on two localhost services — LM Studio and Anki — that run as desktop GUI applications on the host machine. Putting the Python code inside a Docker container would require exposing those host ports into the container, mounting volumes for audio files, and dealing with cross-platform path differences. The complexity would exceed the benefit.

The reproducibility problem that containers solve is better addressed here by pinning dependency versions in `requirements.txt` if needed. The project has four direct dependencies and all of them are stable, well-maintained packages.

## Dependencies

### requirements.txt

```
jamdict
jamdict-data
edge-tts
requests
```

These are the four direct dependencies:

| Package | Purpose | Installs |
|---------|---------|----------|
| `jamdict` | Python interface to JMdict and KANJIDIC2 Japanese dictionaries | Query API + SQLite database driver |
| `jamdict-data` | Pre-packaged dictionary database (~54 MB compressed) | SQLite database file containing JMdict + KANJIDIC2 |
| `edge-tts` | Text-to-speech via Microsoft Edge's TTS service | Async TTS client with voice selection |
| `requests` | HTTP client | Used for LM Studio and AnkiConnect API calls |

### Installation

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### The `jamdict-data` Problem on Windows

`jamdict-data` has a known installation issue on Windows. The package bundles a compressed SQLite database (`jamdict.db.xz`) that gets decompressed during installation. On Windows, the build process sometimes fails with `WinError 32` ("The process cannot access the file because it is being used by another process") because the installer tries to delete the `.xz` file while it is still memory-mapped.

If the install fails, try these steps in order:

**1. Install `wheel` first, then retry:**

```bash
pip install wheel
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

The `wheel` package provides an alternative build path that sometimes avoids the file lock.

**2. If it still fails, install `jamdict-data` separately with `setup.py`:**

```bash
pip install jamdict edge-tts requests
pip download jamdict-data --no-binary :all: -d /tmp/jd
cd /tmp/jd
tar xzf jamdict_data-1.5.tar.gz
cd jamdict_data-1.5
python setup.py install --user
```

**3. If the database file is installed but not decompressed, decompress it manually:**

```python
import lzma, shutil, jamdict_data, os

xz_path = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(jamdict_data.__file__), "jamdict.db.xz")
db_path = xz_path.replace(".xz", "")

with lzma.open(xz_path, "rb") as f_in, open(db_path, "wb") as f_out:
    shutil.copyfileobj(f_in, f_out)
```

Run this as a one-off script or in a Python REPL. It reads the compressed database and writes the decompressed version alongside it.

### Verifying the Install

After installation, verify that all packages import correctly:

```bash
python -c "from jamdict import Jamdict; print('jamdict OK')"
python -c "import edge_tts; print('edge-tts OK')"
python -c "import requests; print('requests OK')"
```

The `jamdict` import will take a moment on first run as it locates the database file.

## LM Studio

LM Studio is a desktop application that runs large language models locally and exposes them through an OpenAI-compatible HTTP API. Our `llm.py` module sends requests to this API.

### Installation

Download LM Studio from [lmstudio.ai](https://lmstudio.ai). It is available for Windows, macOS, and Linux. Install it like any desktop application.

### Loading a Model

After launching LM Studio, you need to download and load a model. From the home screen:

1. Use the search bar to find a model. For Japanese language tasks, instruction-tuned models in the 7B–13B parameter range work well. Some options:
   - `Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct` — strong multilingual performance, good Japanese
   - `Mistral-7B-Instruct` — reliable general-purpose instruction following
   - `Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct` — solid baseline with good structured output

2. Select a **quantization level**. Quantization compresses the model to use less memory at the cost of some quality. Common levels:
   - `Q4_K_M` — good balance of quality and memory usage (~4–5 GB for a 7B model)
   - `Q5_K_M` — slightly better quality, slightly more memory
   - `Q8_0` — near-original quality, ~2x the memory of Q4

   If your GPU has 8 GB of VRAM, a 7B model at Q4_K_M will fit comfortably. If you have 16 GB or more, you can run larger models or higher quantization levels.

3. Click **Download** and wait for the download to complete.

### Starting the Local Server

Once a model is loaded:

1. Navigate to the **Local Server** tab (in the left sidebar or top menu, depending on your LM Studio version).
2. Select the model you downloaded.
3. Click **Start Server**.

The server starts on `http://localhost:1234` by default. You can verify it is running:

```bash
curl http://localhost:1234/v1/models
```

Or with Python:

```python
import requests
r = requests.get("http://localhost:1234/v1/models")
print(r.json())
```

This should return a JSON response listing the loaded model. The exact model name does not matter for our purposes — the `config.py` file uses `"local-model"` as a placeholder, and LM Studio routes to whatever model is currently loaded regardless of the name in the request.

### Configuration

The relevant config values in `config.py`:

```python
LM_STUDIO_URL = "http://localhost:1234/v1/chat/completions"
LM_STUDIO_MODEL = "local-model"
```

`LM_STUDIO_URL` points to the chat completions endpoint, which follows the OpenAI API format. `LM_STUDIO_MODEL` is sent in the request body — LM Studio requires the field to be present but ignores its value, always routing to the loaded model.

If you changed the port in LM Studio's server settings, update `LM_STUDIO_URL` accordingly.

## Anki and AnkiConnect

### Installing Anki

Download Anki from [apps.ankiweb.net](https://apps.ankiweb.net). Install and launch it. If this is a fresh install, you will have a single default deck.

### Installing AnkiConnect

AnkiConnect is a third-party Anki add-on that exposes a JSON-over-HTTP API on `localhost:8765`. Our `anki_connect.py` module uses this API to create decks, store media files, and add notes.

To install:

1. In Anki, go to **Tools > Add-ons > Get Add-ons...**
2. Enter the add-on code: `2055492159`
3. Click **OK** and restart Anki.

After restarting, AnkiConnect runs silently in the background whenever Anki is open. Verify it is running:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8765 -X POST -d "{\"action\": \"version\", \"version\": 6}"
```

Or with Python:

```python
import requests
r = requests.post("http://localhost:8765", json={"action": "version", "version": 6})
print(r.json())  # {"result": 6, "error": null}
```

### Note Types and Deck Configuration

Our tool uses the `Basic` note type, which ships with every Anki installation. It has two fields: `Front` and `Back`. The flashcard module writes HTML into these fields, including `[sound:filename.mp3]` tags that Anki renders as audio players.

The deck name is set in `config.py`:

```python
ANKI_DECK_NAME = "Japanese"
ANKI_NOTE_TYPE = "Basic"
```

The tool creates the deck automatically if it does not exist (via AnkiConnect's `createDeck` action), so there is no manual deck setup required. If you want to use a different deck name or note type, change these values before running the tool.

### AnkiConnect Permissions

By default, AnkiConnect accepts requests from any origin on localhost. If you have modified AnkiConnect's configuration (Tools > Add-ons > AnkiConnect > Config), ensure that `webCorsOriginList` includes `*` or is not overly restrictive:

```json
{
    "apiKey": null,
    "apiLogPath": null,
    "webBindAddress": "127.0.0.1",
    "webBindPort": 8765,
    "webCorsOriginList": ["*"]
}
```

If you have set an `apiKey`, you will need to modify `anki_connect.py` to include it in requests. The default configuration (no API key) is assumed throughout this tutorial.

## config.py

With all services installed and verified, the full configuration file:

```python
LM_STUDIO_URL = "http://localhost:1234/v1/chat/completions"
LM_STUDIO_MODEL = "local-model"
ANKI_CONNECT_URL = "http://localhost:8765"
ANKI_DECK_NAME = "Japanese"
ANKI_NOTE_TYPE = "Basic"
AUDIO_DIR = "audio/"
```

Six constants, all pointing to local resources. Modules that communicate with external services (`llm.py`, `tts.py`, `anki_connect.py`) import this file to resolve endpoints and paths. There is no environment variable parsing, no `.env` file loading, and no runtime configuration. If you need to change a value, you edit this file and re-run the tool.

`AUDIO_DIR` is a relative path. Generated `.mp3` files are written here during the TTS stage, then read back during the AnkiConnect stage (to base64-encode and upload them to Anki's media folder). The directory is created automatically if it does not exist.

## Verification Checklist

Before proceeding to the implementation chapters, confirm that all components are operational:

| Component | How to Verify | Expected Result |
|-----------|---------------|-----------------|
| Python | `python --version` | 3.8 or later |
| jamdict | `python -c "from jamdict import Jamdict; Jamdict()"` | No errors |
| edge-tts | `python -c "import edge_tts"` | No errors |
| requests | `python -c "import requests"` | No errors |
| LM Studio | `curl http://localhost:1234/v1/models` | JSON with model list |
| Anki | Application is open and running | Visible in taskbar |
| AnkiConnect | `curl -X POST http://localhost:8765 -d '{"action":"version","version":6}'` | `{"result": 6, ...}` |

If any of these fail, revisit the corresponding section above. The implementation chapters assume all of these are working.
